- Hello, YouTube.
Hello, Sam.
- Hey, YouTube.
Hey, Michael.
- Hey, Chris May.
Looks like you are psyched to do some Panda stuff.
So hopefully so.
We're gonna talk about all sorts of fun things.
Those of you watching on YouTube,
either live or the replay, thanks for being here.
Sam, let's go.
Sam, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
- It's great to be back.
- Yeah, it's good to have you back.
Previously, you were here with Philip Guo and your research,
is he your advisor at UCSD?
- Yeah, Philip's my advisor.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Yeah, so Philip is a great guy.
He's been on the show multiple times before
and you all were here previously to talk about,
he had analyzed an insane number
of notebook environments, right?
- Yeah, something like 60 of them.
- Yeah, like 60.
So people think of JupyterLab and maybe Google CoLab,
and then is there another one?
Maybe 60.
That's insane, right?
- There's just a long list.
We have like a giant table in that paper
where it takes up one whole page,
and it's a lot going on.
- That was really fun to have you on to talk about that.
And I suspect that that list is longer, not shorter now.
- Of course, of course.
- It just is growing.
But how about we just do a quick sync up?
What have you been up to?
When was that?
That was about a year, year and a half ago.
So it's been a while.
What have you been up to?
You still over at UCSD?
- Yeah, so I'm still at UCSD.
I'm working on my PhD.
- UCSD being University of California, San Diego
for those who are not hanging out in the West Coast US
and are familiar with all the UC acronyms.
- Yeah, UC San Diego.
I'm here in sunny San Diego.
I'm doing my PhD in cognitive science.
But what that really means for me is,
most of my research is in a field called
human-computer interaction, which is,
the way I describe it is more or less
the study of user interfaces,
how people interact with computers,
and for me specifically, how people interact,
how people use computers to teach
and learn programming and data science.
- Yeah, that sounds super fun.
There's just so many more interfaces these days.
Human computer interfaces used to be just like,
well, how do you use Windows or something like that, right?
- Even before that, it was like,
how do you type stuff into a terminal
before we even had Windows?
And then people from the community was like,
you know, Windows would be good.
And then they were like, maybe touchscreens will be good.
And so now we have all these cool ways to input
commands into a computer and make use of that.
- Yeah, absolutely.
And so it seems like you and Philip are somewhat focused on
how developers interact with computers.
Is that fair to say?
- We kind of do a mix.
So Philip, I think has done a lot of developer
oriented work, maybe like in the last five years
or 10 years or so.
For me specifically, I'm more interested in like
how students and instructors use computers.
So, how people use, like create lecture slides
using like screenshots of like their notebook environments
and how people like put code in their slides
and use code to teach while also like,
while also talking over at the same time.
- Sure, well, and notebooks are all about communicating
computational ideas, either being science
or developer or data science, right?
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
And then nowadays we see a lot of notebooks
used in the classroom as well. So instructors will not only have lecture slides, but a lot of
instructors will like flip back and forth between lecture slides and a computational notebook like
Jupyter. So they'll have lecture slides for a few minutes, and then they'll do some live coding in
front of students for another few minutes, and they'll switch back and forth. So we're seeing
a lot of that sort of use case in the classroom. And that's where, like, that's the sort of thing
that I'm really interested in, because here we have people doing something visual, doing
doing something verbal, but also now doing,
working with code and having students like
see code in the classroom.
- I think it must be such an advantage
for students these days.
I remember when I was in school,
it was either the instructor would be writing something
either on the blackboard or on like one of those overlay
things with a pen and with a light
that literally went through it.
Or, you know, you would just get a book or something.
But now if you want to say, well,
look how this, look how these forces in physics
or look how these chemical bonds are formed.
You could see them actually,
you could see actual animation
that you could try new ideas.
And it's just, it's opened up so much exploration, I think.
- Yeah, I think it's really cool.
And, you know, I don't know about you,
but I would definitely prefer to write code in the computer
rather than writing code in the overhead slide.
- Oh my goodness.
I cannot even imagine doing it that way.
So for sure, for sure.
All right, speaking of code, let's talk about your project.
So you have this project called Pandas Tutor.
- Yeah, that's right.
- Yeah, and this is a little bit of a next generation
data science thing followed on from Python Tutor, right?
I see some similarities in the website and stuff like that.
Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
So Pandas Tutor,
the website is similar to the Python Tutor website
because Philip used his old style sheet for both of them.
- Sure, sure.
- When we were getting this out the door,
we were, at the time, we were like very focused
on squashing bugs and adding new features.
And then the website was like,
oh, okay, like we've got to launch this thing.
We need something to put on.
So Phillip was like, okay, let me copy my styles.
- Yeah, well, his styles look good.
So I think it's, there's nothing wrong with that.
It's very nice visualizations and interactives.
So what is this?
Why would people be interested in Pandas Tutor?
Is this, it might sound like it's a series
of video courses on pandas or something,
but that's not what it is, right?
Tell people what this is.
- Yeah, so Pandas Tutor is a little website tool
where you can paste in some Python pandas code.
So Python code that works with data frames.
What the tool will do is it'll take your code
and break it down step by step.
It'll draw a little diagram for you
at every step of your code.
So I have a little example on the website,
but the example on the website basically shows
that if you have a few lines of pandas code,
when you run those lines in a Jupyter notebook,
let's say, all you get when you run the cell,
all you get when you run the code is a final output.
So even if there are like four steps in the recipe,
all you get is the finished cake
and you don't really get to see the middle steps to happen.
- And so often, you know, that's what you do.
you're like, I'm gonna transform this data frame
with these multiple operations to get a new data frame.
That's the destination I wanna be at, right?
- Totally, totally.
Yeah, and it happens all the time
in real practice for data analysis.
And it also happens a lot in the classroom.
So a lot of times when I'm teaching in data science,
a little piece of data science,
I'll write a few lines of code,
but the problem is, like, students ask me like,
oh, what happened?
Like, there's a lot going on.
Like, can you show me like this step
or like step three in the code or step four?
and I have to like manually comment out lines of code
and display those data frames to students.
So I'm still kind of averse from that use case.
- Yeah, absolutely.
And it's totally reasonable
that you would comment out those lines,
but it's also more difficult still
to see the transformation, right?
So if I say, well, what happens if I don't do,
say a group by, but I just get the previous result,
well then, you know, you kind of,
how do you put that side by side with the other,
the next step, right?
there's not a great mechanism for saying,
put these side by side and see the changes
without like lots of scrolling and back and forth and stuff.
- Totally, totally.
Yeah, yeah.
So it's something, it's a use case that came directly
out of our experiences teaching data science,
where a lot of times when we teach, we're like, okay,
in the top cell of a notebook, we'll like display dogs.
And then the cell below it,
we'll do some stuff with the data frame,
like dogs.sort_values.
And then we have to say, okay, students,
like look at the top data frame and look at the bottom one
and then compare those two and like stare really hard at it
and try to figure out what happened
between the two data frames to understand it.
So, whereas with Pandas Tutor,
what I could do instead is put the code,
just paste the code into Pandas Tutor.
It'll display the two data frames side by side
and draw some arrows between the two data frames
or add some coloring so that I can see,
oh, okay, the rows were sorted.
I don't have to ask people to like stare really hard
and imagine the rails moving from place to place.
- And before we get too far into this episode,
I do wanna just point out to people,
like this is a really visual tool,
which is its massive advantage,
but that also puts Sam and me at a disadvantage
for discussing it during this audio,
mostly audio presentation.
So you might consider checking out also the YouTube stream
and flipping around there,
or just open up pandastutor.com
and play around with it yourself.
But that gets all about just a live example.
So with that said, I wanna dive into a few things.
There's gonna be an example here
that we're gonna cover a lot.
And it's an example using a pandas data frame called dogs.
And the dogs are like the breed,
which would be German shepherd or terrier or whatever.
Then type is a herding dog or a hound dog or a toy dog.
I love the toy dog idea.
And then there's a filtering statement
where you say dogs bracket, dog size, equal, equal medium.
Right, that's a standard pandas like,
let's do this filter type of wager clause.
And then there's a sort where you sort by the type of dog,
you know, be them herding or hound dog
or working dog, whatever.
And then you do a group by on the type.
So show me all the non-sporting dogs,
all the sporting dogs and so on.
Yeah?
- Yeah, that's right.
- We'll be using this data quite a bit.
Before we get into analyzing pandas,
I guess one thing I was wondering is,
it's super focused on pandas and pandas data frames.
Did you consider making it for other tools
like a NumPy one or a TensorFlow one?
Or like why pandas specifically
out of the data science space?
- It's a great question.
Pandas happens to be the de facto tool
for working with data tables in Pandas.
I mean, working with data tables in Python.
And it's taught a lot
in introductory courses specifically.
So a lot of intro to data science courses,
when they teach students how to work with data tables,
they'll also teach students how to work with Pandas.
We chose to focus on Pandas because of those two aspects.
So one, it's like a common standard package that a lot of people use in practice.
And it's also a package that people, a lot of people learn when they're learning data
science for the first time, they'll learn pandas as one of the first stepping stones
to learning how to do data analysis.
Now there is another version of this tool for the R data, like R tidyverse world.
It's called tidy data tutor.
instead of Pandas Tutor.
And it was made by one of my lab mates and Philip as well.
So the three of us kind of worked together.
I worked on the Pandas side, and then my lab mate
worked on the R-Tidyverse side.
- Sure.
Okay, yeah, that's cool that,
regardless of which side of data science you're on,
you can grab this and run with it.
- Yeah, and as for other tools, I think the approach
that the tool uses to analyze code could be applied
to all sorts of other tools, including tools like TensorFlow.
And that's probably one of the exciting things for me,
is that this, for me, is a stepping stone
towards all sorts of visual tools
for learning Python packages or other data science
specific things that otherwise are difficult to understand.
Or things that you would normally draw a picture
to understand normally, I can imagine a tool
like this drawing a picture for you
or helping you when you're explaining
your code to someone else.
- When I first learned about this,
Brian Okken and Leah Cole and I spoke about it
over on the Python Bytes podcast.
And Leah made a really interesting point when she saw this.
My first impression is, okay, this is a great way
to teach students who are getting into data science.
And it sounds like that's a very solid use case.
But Leah said, hey, this would be really good
if you just like went to stack overflow
or you picked up some new code
and you're like, what does this do?
This is like a complicated pandas expression.
Let me throw it in here and you could visualize that.
So I wanna sort of put that out there
for people to think about.
Well, if they're not learning data science right now,
they're probably still encountering algorithms
and data sets that are new to them
and that might be useful as well.
What do you think?
- Yeah, I totally agree with that.
And actually one of the ideas that Phillip and I had
is to do a little bookmarklet, where if you put the bookmarklet in your browser bookmarks
bar and then you're on Stack Overflow and you click that button, we could even show
you those diagrams, like the panes created in line, if you click it online on a Stack
Overflow website, or let's say the panes documentation.
I've certainly run into the problem where I'm trying to like, I Google like, how do
I let's say unpivot a data frame and then I pull up the first Stack Overflow result
and then it works but it's like five lines of complicated, you know, machinery, and I'm
trying to figure out what's going on and I have to like, like kind of walk through it
step by step myself to make sure it's not messing up my data in some way.
Yeah, so I can imagine like a tool like this.
If you could display the visualizations in line and just put it in Stack Overflow's website
itself on the user side,
then that could be a nice way
to make use of the visualizations in real practice.
>> That would be really cool. Just install a browser helper
that every time it detects a Panda statement.
>> Yeah, like a little Chrome extension.
That would be super neat. I would use that.
>> Yeah, for sure. So let's
click on "Start visualizing your Python code now."
That'll pull this up and run.
What happens for those of you who are not familiar
with Python tutor and pandas tutor
is it actually executes,
you put a block of code in here
and it actually executes it in a container
or something like that, right?
- Yeah, that's right.
So it'll run your code in a Docker container
on one of our servers.
- Nice.
So you don't have to just explore other people's code,
right?
You can put whatever you want in here.
Now, the first thing that I think about
when I think about data frames
is data.
Obviously you've got to get some data in here.
And as we were talking about this Chrome extension,
one of the challenges for me is,
well, here's a cool little code snippet,
but it has to have the proper data frame data backing it
before it really means anything, right?
- Yeah, that's right.
It's a challenge.
- It is.
So how do you get data in here?
It's, how about this?
What are the options for getting data here?
- Okay.
So the one challenge about hosting a tool
that runs code for other people is that it's a little bit,
you run into issues when you let the tool
also have internet access,
'cause then people will start mining Bitcoins.
- Yes, exactly.
- Using these two.
- Up to a code on the internet, how could it go wrong?
I mean, I know with the Docker container,
it's not gonna harm you or the other things most likely,
unless there's an exploit fully in Docker,
but they're going to exploit your computational resources
and things like that, right?
So that won't-- - That's right.
- Yeah. - Yeah, yeah.
- So you probably don't have full just root access
to do whatever you feel like here.
- Yeah, so the tool, it cuts off internet access
for your code and it also imposes like a few memory limits.
So I don't think you can write,
you might be able to read or write to disk temporarily.
I don't quite remember the details of that,
But I do know that it does restrict internet access.
So a lot of things like,
one common way that we'll get datasets in class
is we'll do pandas.read_csv and put in a URL of a CSV file.
And unfortunately that doesn't work for the tool.
So the way that we're getting around this right now
is in the examples that we have for pandas tutor
on the website, we have like inline CSVs.
So we put a snippet of a CSV file as a Python string.
And then we can read that string into pandas
as if it was a CSV file directly.
- Yeah, so you just drop it in as part of the code
as a, what's that, a literal string,
the triple quotes that'll go multi-line.
So you just drop it in the middle of that, right?
- Yeah, yeah, and it's not,
I definitely don't think it's an ideal solution.
What I would like,
like one stepping stone to like a future solution
would be to include some example datasets
with Python, with Kindest Tutor so people can load in directly.
>> That's a good idea.
>> The R version of this tool has some built-in datasets
because of R's built-in packages.
R has, I think it comes with default,
like the cars dataset and maybe some flowers datasets.
You can load those in directly and that makes
the R version of this a little bit more convenient.
>> Okay. Interesting.
>> We're thinking about ways of loading in data right now,
But in terms of being able to load in arbitrary data,
the only real option right now is to go into your CSV file
and copy and paste out a few lines of it
into the tool directly.
- It's not a huge problem because the goal here
is not to execute and you'll get results from it.
It's like, what would it look like if I did this?
- Yeah, that's right.
So it's not really about like running,
visualizing like gigabytes of data frame transformations
because in those cases, we're gonna draw a bajillion arrows
and it's really hard to see what's exactly happening.
- Exactly, from an understanding perspective,
it might be worse, right?
Because it's like, as people will see
as they explore panastutor.com,
like it's putting lines and little interactive widgets
all over the place to see how the data flows.
And if you've got too much,
then it's just lines everywhere.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, cool.
So we've got this data, which we already talked about
a little bit, the dogs.
And so we've got like a Labrador Retriever,
which is a sporting dog that is,
it lives to 12 years, it's medium sized,
and it's 67 pounds and so on.
So that's the kind of data that we're working with.
You jam that into an in-memory CSV string,
use IO.stringIO to treat it like a file stream
and tell pandas to read CSV.
- Okay, so then you wanna know basically,
let me go to the final,
you wanna know given the longevity of a dog
and it's given, no, sorry,
given a type of dog like non-sporting, sporting, working,
what is its median longevity in years and its weight?
All right, so that's the kind of question
that you're trying to answer,
which is kind of incredible that given this data,
it's only three lines of pandas to answer that.
- Yeah, it has a lot behind the scenes.
- Yeah.
Yeah, that's pretty remarkable actually.
So what happens when you say visualize this
is it takes that same code block
that we've been talking about,
dogs, dog of size, equal equal medium,
sort values, group by median and so on.
And you put that on the screen
where the parts that are not relevant at the moment
are grayed out and the code that it's actually applying
at that step is like strong or regular color font.
That's really clever.
How do you come up with that idea to say like,
we're gonna show the flow through this code
by like dimming the other parts of the code?
- Yeah, so when we were making this tool,
our first cut of this was actually just to show the code
that we were running itself.
So let's start- - Right, so you said like,
- Size equal equal medium or something like that, right?
- That's exactly right.
So in the first version of this tool,
we did like, if we're filtering a data frame
and then like sorting it,
we would just show the code for filtering first,
but we show all the code for filtering.
And then when we sort the data frame,
then we would show the code for filtering and sorting
because that's the snippet of code that we would execute
or like visualize.
And it ended up being a little bit,
end up being like less helpful in our opinion when we had like longer chains,
especially because when you have longer chains, it looks like there's like five
things running, but really all we're visualizing is the last step.
So what the solution we kind of came around to was to say, okay, well, we'll
just display all the code that we're visualizing, but bold, like highlight
the part that we're visualizing in this step.
So if there's four steps, then we'll have like four little diagram displays,
and we'll highlight the individual steps that we're running at each time.
Yeah, there's a lot of subtleness in this tool that it takes a...
On first glance, you don't see exactly how much it's communicating,
but there's a lot of nice touches like that.
So in this first step, it says we're going to go and filter down our dataset
from all the different types of dogs, like large dogs, small dogs, and so on,
to just look at medium sized breeds.
So then we get to the thing that we were talking about
where you've got two data frames
as if you had done just like df.head or something
where it puts the top and then like a few listings of them.
- That's right.
- But it puts them side by side, right?
Tell us what's on the screen here.
Describe this.
- Yeah, so on the left,
we display the original data frame dogs.
And then on the right, we display the data frame dogs,
but with the medium dogs filtered.
So the right data frame only has medium dogs,
and the left data frame has all the dogs
in the original data frame.
- Right, so that's the filtering that you might first see,
but then you also have lines, which are pretty cool.
- Yeah, yeah.
So what we're doing here is we're showing which rows
from the original data frame made it
into the right data frame.
So in the original data frame, it looks like rows three,
or three through seven, and a few more other rows
made it into the right side.
And what we're doing is we're drawing arrows
to show from the left side,
which rows got copied over into the right side.
- Yeah, so in that filter,
you can sort of see them going across, which is fantastic.
And the other part that's subtle,
I guess there's two more,
is this looks like a static picture,
like it almost looks like a JPEG or something,
but then as you move your mouse over,
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> You can do it on the right side too.
If you hover on the right side,
it'll show you the rows that went into that left side.
>> Okay.
>> You can do it on the right side too.
>> Yeah.
>> You can do it on the right side.
piece of data along story.
- Yeah, that's right.
And you can do it on the right side too.
So if you hover on the right side,
it'll show you the rows that went into that left side.
This is convenient when there's a lot of arrows.
So this is like the main reason why we did this
was in some cases there are a lot of arrows
and you wanna just show a few of them.
And to do that, the easiest way to do that
in this tool right now is to highlight
moving mouse over a row.
- Yeah.
- So that's one subtlety here.
- In this case, it's not super relevant
'cause it's just a filter,
but when you get down to like group by and stuff like that,
you're like, well, show me everything that went
into this row on this group by like, well, these three.
All right, that's pretty cool.
- That's right.
Yeah, so it's especially helpful
when you have like multiple rows on the left
going into a single row on the right
or some weird combination of rows
that otherwise like would be hard to see.
- Yeah, for sure.
One final thing is we're doing a sort by this comparison,
or sorry, filter by this comparison
on the size column of the data frame.
So dog bracket size equal equal medium.
On both of these, you've got a vertical outline on the size.
That's another aspect that's really nice
to highlight what's going on here.
>> Yeah, that's right. We're drawing a box from the size column.
That's meant to show the user
like what column we're using for filtering.
>> Yeah.
>> There's actually one more thing here I want to point out,
which is that if you display this data frame in a Jupyter Notebook,
you might not actually see any medium-sized dogs
because they're hidden in the middle rows of this data frame.
>> Yeah.
>> By default, Pandas displays
a few rows in the top and the bottom of a data frame.
But sometimes when you're filtering,
the rows that you're filtering only come from the middle of
the data frame which are hidden by default.
So you have to really scrub through the data frame yourself
in a Jupyter Notebook to see that there are medium dogs
in the first place.
So one thing we're doing with this tool is
whenever we draw an arrow, we make sure that the rows
on the left are visible to the user.
So we'll selectively hide and show rows to make sure
that the user can always see the rows
that we're making use of.
- Right, the most important ones are the ones
that are included.
So let's include some of them, right?
- That's right.
Yeah, you've got these little subtle one more,
four more in this section and so on.
So that's pretty neat.
All right, so, so far we're step one,
we've taken all the different types of dogs
and we're now down to a data frame
of just medium sized dogs.
The next thing to do was what?
Sort them, right?
- Yeah, that's right.
- Okay, so maybe tell us about this step here.
- Yeah, so in this step,
we're sorting the rows by the type column.
So again, we're going to highlight or draw a box
from the type column for the input and the output
to show the user this is a column we're
using for this operation.
And here we're drawing arrows.
And the arrows kind of crisscross in this diagram
because some of the rows go to the top of the data frame
and some of the rows go to the bottom of the data
frame after we sort them.
Yeah, as you would expect.
But you can see after the sort, here's
where everything sort of started and ended up.
So that's pretty straightforward, I would say.
Then you have a group by one.
Tell us how you visualize the group by stuff
because that's pretty interesting to think about.
How do you represent the two-dimensional data
but then additionally the groups?
- Yeah, yeah.
So when we group data, what we do visually
is we like use the same color to highlight the backgrounds
of each row within a group.
So in this example, all the non-sporting dogs
will get highlighted blue.
All the sporting dogs get highlighted light green,
and then all the working dogs get highlighted red.
So you can see visually how the rows are put together
in groups by pandas.
- Yeah, fantastic.
And then finally, simple but also very cool visualization
is you just go to that data frame,
you say, give us the median of that.
And I guess, I don't know pandas super well,
but I guess if you just say dot median,
that'll just give you the median of all the columns
that are numerical.
Is that what happens?
- That's right, so it'll give you the median
for all the dog longevities
and the median for all the dog weights.
- Which is the, yeah, the two numerical columns, yep.
Okay.
- And in this case, what we're doing instead
is because we've grouped the data frame
before taking the median,
Pandas does the median within each group.
So it'll find the median of the median longevity
and weight for the non-sporting dogs
and then for the sporting dogs
and then for the working dogs.
So what we're doing in the diagram here
is we're showing how the four non-sporting dogs
on the left side get kind of aggregated together
into one row on the right-hand side.
So there's four arrows going from like four rows
on the left side that go into one row on the right.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
And this is probably that case where the,
showing where the lines go is most interesting
because there's like the first four results
are all non-sporting, so they contribute to row one.
So you've got all these arrows going into that first group
and so on.
I think that really helps visualize how this is computed.
- Yeah, and that's right.
And group by is especially a tricky thing
when we teach students,
because students are like,
I'm gonna start sorting,
'cause like, you know, the rows get moved around.
But when we do group by and then do something after,
where all of a sudden, like my rows disappear,
like where did my rows go?
And so here we can see exactly where all the rows go.
- Yeah, that is very tricky,
because often you don't see that group by
intermediate representation, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
And pandas actually does not help people
understand the groupby.
So in a notebook, if you do .groupby by itself,
all you get back is like this pandas groupby object
at some memory address.
And that's for novices, it's like,
I don't, I have no idea what just happened.
And so what we decided to do here as kind of like
a design step is instead of showing the default groupby
like display, which is just text.
We expanded it out to the original DataFrame
plus some colors.
- Yeah, yeah, it really is a great visualization.
So I guess while we're talking about setting up your code,
one thing that's interesting here is I can go to the top
and I can jam in my code and I could do,
maybe I could change this to like, I don't know, max.
It's like work.
- Let's see.
- There we go.
So I got a different result by running dot max
and I might play and explore and so on.
And then I'm like, I wanna save this.
I'm gonna save it for myself
or I wanna share it on Twitter
because I just gotta say something on Twitter
and let people check it out.
I wanna put it in a gist.
I want to share with my students, whatever.
So you have a handy little thing at the bottom
that lets you create sort of a shareable link type of thing.
How does that work?
you just base 64 encode the stuff at the top into the URL or what happens?
It's actually even similar to base 64 encoding.
We just put the code verbatim into the URL.
If you're looking at the URL,
like the Shareable URL,
you'll see that we put the code like import
hand this as PD into the URL there.
Yeah, it's true. It's just HTML.
It's URL encoded is what it is.
It's just URL encoded.
Yeah. So we don't do anything super special with it.
And this works because URLs can actually be pretty long,
like browsers will accept pretty long URLs.
And so for a lot of cases,
we actually can put the entirety of the code
in the URL software sharing.
- Yeah, that's cool.
So people can come down here and they can copy this URL
and then they can do whatever they want.
Either save it as a bookmark for themselves
or share it, right?
That's cool.
- Yeah, that's right.
So the idea is if I had, let's say,
like an email I'm sending to a colleague
and I send them a little picture of data frames
with some arrows, I can also send this URL
which will let the other person view
the original code I used to create the diagrams.
- Sure, so maybe it makes sense to do a snapshot,
screenshot of just one step and then you say,
well, here you can explore the whole thing
and rerun it and so on.
Also, it kind of leads to the reproducible publications,
reproducible science.
If you're trying to explain to people what this step does,
it might be worth putting that in the paper, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
Yeah, as one use case we imagined was like,
let's say for a lecture slide,
I'll take a screenshot of this page.
I can also put in the URL,
like some small text at the bottom of the lecture slides
so people can play around with it afterward.
- You need a URL shortening service,
like a pandas.toot.or/
- Totally.
Yeah, yeah.
- I don't even know if not ORs or domains,
but they should be.
- I don't know, maybe.
- But like a bitly equivalent of a short one, yeah.
Cool.
- Yeah.
- I do see there's a place I can suggest improvements.
So like, I can just talk to you.
- Yeah, just let us, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Just send us a little email.
Yeah, one thing we do wanna do is to include like a,
like save this diagram as a PNG or SVG button.
- Oh, nice.
- We haven't gone around to it,
but we would like to include that at some point.
- Yeah, that'd be great.
You know what would be fantastic is save it
as an animated GIF or something like that.
- Yeah, that would be cool.
- Or you could sort of see like the little arrows
run by or something like, yeah, that'd be fun.
- That's a cool idea, yeah.
Yeah, I'll think about that.
- Well, just give me more work.
So super cool project.
This project is a part of your PhD work, right?
- Yeah, that's right.
- Yeah.
What's next?
Where's it going from here?
- So the-- - Thesis?
- Dissertation center. - Yeah, so for me,
yeah, so for me personally, I would love to,
I'm looking to graduate like next year's spring.
So my hope is that this project will be
like a major piece of the thesis
and I'm gonna get to talk about it a lot.
And as for the tool, Next Steps,
In the short term, we'd like to expand
the types of visualizations it can do.
So right now it doesn't know how to do joins, for instance,
or pivots.
And so we really like to include those
because those also tend to be really confusing for people
learning pandas for the first time.
- They're in the group by category of hard to understand.
Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
- I think they're worse actually.
- Yeah, it's a toss up, I think, in my experience.
People, students who struggle,
So you'll always have one, at least one of those three
to struggle with, group by, joins, and pivots.
Those three are just really confusing.
And longer term for this tool, we're
thinking it would be great to have it,
like as I alluded to a little bit earlier,
like have a version of it that we can embed into Stack
Overflow or even the Panis documentation itself.
And we're also looking at different alternative ways
like drawing arrows and colors to see what can help students. And then we're looking,
we're also looking at like ways of applying this general like code analysis approach to
other tools for visualization. - Yeah, there's certainly other tools
that could benefit from it, although not so many of them as popular as pandas. But for example,
like Dask. Dask is panda-like, but it's fairly complicated what happens to compute stuff.
I mean, not understanding the ideas of it necessarily, but it's like, okay, well, it's
going to go after this cluster and these things happened.
There could be interesting things there.
Yeah, totally.
Like there's Dask and now there's like other tools like Ray and like, there's even, even
like if we're going really far out, there's like tools like Spark and like MapReduce and
stuff that distribute computing across different computers.
Visualizing those would be really cool, I think, because, you know, for me as a user
of those tools. Sometimes it's like when like one computer breaks, it's really hard to debug
and figure out what happened. It definitely is. Another one is just database queries.
Oh yeah, I mean it's pretty similar. You've got like group bys, you've got sorting, you've got
filtering, select where clauses, and yeah, I think that would be a pretty natural match as well. But
- Yeah, there's a lot of places for it to go.
So, very cool.
Are you using this in any of your courses
and things like that?
- At the moment, I'm not teaching any data science courses,
but this summer I will be teaching a course
at UC San Diego.
And so I'm really hoping to use this tool
to like make some little diagrams to copy and paste
into my lecture slides.
Before I would make these diagrams manually
using like Google slides, like arrows and shapes and such,
but it's a huge pain.
- It's so painful.
As somebody who does online courses,
I'm like, I really want to put some arrows
and show how this goes.
Like, oh boy, this is a lot of work.
- It's a lot of work.
It's a lot of work.
- Yeah, I've actually used a Python tutor
in my beginner Python course to show people like, okay,
when you have two variables,
but they point to the same object in memory,
here's why changing one of them changes the other,
for example, 'cause you're really the same.
They're just like pointing at the same things,
but they're changing the thing they point at.
and whatnot.
It's pretty cool.
So very nice.
Yeah, and you're also working on a book, right?
- Yeah, it's a book.
The website right now,
it says "Principles and Techniques of Data Science,"
but we're renaming the book to "Learning Data Science."
- Okay, cool.
Now, when is that coming out?
- Ooh, that's a great question.
A question to ask every book author.
- Yes, I know.
- We're really hoping to get a first cut of it
by the end of this year.
We're about like one third or halfway
through the content right now,
but we're hoping to get like the first cut of it out
by the end of this year,
and then go through the whole like editing cycle
and like publication, like before publication work
and have it published sometime a year after.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Well, good luck on that.
You know, we're getting a little bit short on time
mostly because I have a extra tight constraint today.
Sorry about that.
- No problem.
- But let's talk a little bit about the internals.
So we talked about uploading some code
in the text area field of the website,
how it runs in a Docker container, it has restrictions,
but how do you, I'll pull this off,
like understanding some of these things
that we're getting color and pictures and arrows for.
I don't think that's built into Pandas or Python, is it?
- No, it's not.
So what we're doing to actually make this work
is we're parsing the code behind the scenes
and then running each step,
like using a sort of like a debugger.
So what we're doing is we parse the code
to split it up into the steps that we want to run.
So in this case, we would split it up to say
the first step is dogs and the second step is filtering
and the third step is sorting and then grouping
and taking the max.
And then what happens-
- So you just go all the way down to like disassembly.
Do you like this.dis,
'cause that's more than this.
Okay.
- Yeah, yeah.
So we're trying to keep it roughly
at like the level of function calls.
So we just split up into its individual function calls.
And in this case, we have like a slice syntax for filtering.
So we split that up as well.
- Okay.
So then you basically run each step.
if you have the before data frame
and the after data frame of each.
- That's right.
Yeah, so we run each step.
- Unwound regression, yeah.
- We run each step,
get like the left-hand side and the right-hand side.
And then we essentially have some like special rules
where if we do start values,
we'll like use this rule for drawing arrows.
If we see a group by,
we'll use this rule for drawing arrows.
So underneath the hood is really just a lot of heuristics
and rules for specific functions.
So you might say, all right, if it's doing a group by
and here's the groups,
here's how we're going to understand
which group this goes to.
So you're like, all right, it's grouping on the type column.
And so then you know which thing to point it to.
I see.
- Yeah, that's right.
And we could have done a smarter approach
using like some like, I don't know,
some deeper co-analysis or machine learning.
But I think for teaching purposes,
we really wanted to avoid the case
where we draw arrows wrongly.
So we draw arrows that are not supposed to be there.
(laughing)
Yeah.
- That'd be confusing, wouldn't it?
- Yeah, yeah.
And especially for learners,
we would rather just not draw arrows and draw wrong arrows.
I think that was our main,
one of the main design decisions here.
So that's why we resorted to a simple approach
of just using rules and heuristics,
but it gets the job done.
- Sure.
What about source code?
Can people come and check it out and play with it?
Or is it really they can just play with the website?
- Right now only the website's available for the public.
The source code right now,
we're thinking about like making it open source,
but right now it's not really in a state
for the rest of the world to see.
- What about the front end stuff here?
When I went and did a view source on it,
there's not a lot to see basically some JavaScript
and like five or six empty locations on the page, right?
What's the story there?
- Yeah, yeah.
So the front end code is a similar story
as the back end code.
It's like pretty messy and very specific
to our workflows right now.
So getting, so essentially the issue right now
is getting it set up on someone else's computer
would be like a massive pain.
That's one of the main issues with releasing
the source code out is that if we were to release it
right now as open source and people want to play around
with it, then we would probably get tons of emails
from people asking how to like debug this one
like really weird step that we're doing
or how to make it work.
So that's something that we'd like to get around to,
but for the first release, unfortunately we ran out of time
and we just wanted to get the tool out the door.
- Yeah, I know.
That's the most useful bit is for people to go
and play with it, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Fantastic.
Any chance of an offline version, like a progressive web app?
- So I actually would like a version of this tool
that would work as a JupyterLab extension
because JupyterLab has like a Python backend
that we can make use of.
So I could totally imagine this being used
like directly in a notebook
and displaying the diagrams directly in a notebook
without needing to go to panastere.com.
- What about WebAssembly and PyIodide?
- Oh yeah, we thought about that too.
So that's another like far-fetched idea we like to do.
We've seen like, PyIodide right now is just super cool to me
and I really like it.
- And you could turn on like the internet accessibility
and stuff again, right?
Because it's all running,
they're only gonna hack themselves
or use their own resources, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
You know what?
That's great, that's a great point.
I didn't even think about that,
but that totally makes sense.
- It's coming along pretty well.
And Steve Dower was just telling us
that they're starting to do official WebAssembly builds
out of CPython.
So it's a little more stable than some other projects.
So I think there's progress in the WebAssembly space
and the Pyodide guys have got some of the
data science libraries compiled into it.
- Yeah, they got a lot of them working.
- Yeah, so, yeah, possibly.
I don't know what that means in terms of your system
that understands and takes it apart.
That could be totally tricky, but maybe that's an option.
- Yeah, I think it's really viable.
I'd like to, I really like to look into it
in the months to come.
- Yeah, for sure.
All right, well, Sam, I'm afraid that's all the time
we got to talk about today.
So before though, we get to move off of this.
Tell us about the final two questions.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor are you using these days?
- My editor right now is VS Code.
I've flipped, I've jumped editors from like Notepad++
to like Sublime to like Vim and Emacs.
And now I'm settling into the disco world.
It's got me.
- Yeah, cool.
Right on.
And then notable PyPI package.
Yeah, so we found that, that's really cool.
- Honestly, I'm really vibing with TQDM right now.
I forget, I always forget how to pronounce it,
but I really liked that one.
It displays a little progress bar for looping.
And I just think it's a really nicely done package.
- Yeah, if you just do a wrap, just do a decorator
and you do a for loop or something like that.
I don't remember the exact API,
but then you just do a for loop
and it'll just automatically do a progress bar
for what you're doing.
- That's right. - Fantastic.
Yeah, it's really good. - That's right, I love it.
- Yeah, super cool.
All right, final call to action.
People want to visualize their pandas code.
What do you tell them?
- I tell them go to pandasquery.com
and put your code in and see what comes out.
- Yeah, awesome.
Well, and I encourage people when you go there,
try to interact with the diagrams, right?
There's a lot of stuff going on that it doesn't look
at first interactive, but it is.
So yeah, go play around.
Sam, thanks for being on the show.
- Thanks, Michael.
It was really great.
It was a lot of fun for me,
and I really enjoyed talking to you about it.
- Same, bye.
- Okay, see ya.